---
description: characteristics as of 2024
---

# Comparison of IPv4 and IPv6

the following table highlights some of the more major differences

<table data-full-width="true"><thead><tr><th></th><th></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Source and destination addresses are 32 bits (4 bytes) in length.</td><td>Source and destination addresses are 128 bits (16 bytes) in length.</td></tr><tr><td>Uses broadcast addresses to send traffic to all nodes on a subnet.</td><td>There are no IPv6 broadcast addresses. Instead, multicast scoped addresses are used. For more information, see <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multicast_address">Multicast scope</a>.</td></tr><tr><td>Fragmentation is supported at originating hosts and intermediate routers.</td><td>Fragmentation is not supported at routers. It is supported at the originating host only. For more information, see Fragmentation in an IPv6 network.</td></tr><tr><td>IP header includes a checksum.</td><td>IP header does not include a checksum.</td></tr><tr><td>IP header includes options.</td><td>All optional data is moved to IPv6 extension headers. For more information, see <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPv6_packet">Extension headers.</a></td></tr><tr><td>IPSec support is optional.</td><td>IPSec support is required in a full IPv6 implementation.</td></tr><tr><td>No identification of payload for QoS handling by routers is present within the IPv4 header.</td><td>Payload identification for QoS handling by routers is included in the IPv6 header using the Flow Label field. For more information, see <a href="https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6437">Option to provide QoS classification data</a>.</td></tr><tr><td>ICMP Router Discovery is used to determine the IPv4 address of the best default gateway and is optional.</td><td>Uses ICMPv6 <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPv6">Router Solicitation</a> and <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neighbor_Discovery_Protocol">Router Advertisement </a>to determine the IPv6 address of the best default gateway and is a required function. For more information, see Router advertisements. .</td></tr><tr><td>Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) uses broadcast ARP Request frames to resolve an IPv4 address to a link layer address.</td><td>Uses multicast <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neighbor_Discovery_Protocol">Neighbor Solicitation</a> messages for address resolution.</td></tr><tr><td>Internet Group Management Protocol (IGMP) is used to manage local subnet group membership.</td><td>Uses Multicast Listener Discovery (MLD) messages to manage local subnet group membership. For more information, see <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multicast_Listener_Discovery">Multicast Listener Discovery.</a></td></tr><tr><td>Addresses must be configured either manually or through DHCP. (DHCP is not supported in z/OS Communications Server.)</td><td>Addresses can be automatically assigned using stateless address autoconfiguration, assigned using DHCPv6, or manually configured. </td></tr><tr><td>Uses host address (A) resource records in the Domain Name System (DNS) to map host names to IPv4 addresses.</td><td>Uses host address (AAAA) resource records in the Domain Name System (DNS) to map host names to IPv6 addresses.</td></tr><tr><td>Uses pointer (PTR) resource records in the IN-ADDR.ARPA DNS domain to map IPv4 addresses to host names.</td><td>Uses pointer (PTR) resource records in the IP6.ARPA or IP6.INT DNS domain to map IPv6 addresses to host names.</td></tr><tr><td>For QoS, IPv4 supports both differentiated and integrated services.</td><td>Differentiated and integrated services are both supported. In addition, IPv6 provides a flow label that can be used for more granular treatment of packets.</td></tr></tbody></table>
